.\" pve-create-tshoot-image - Build a ReaR troubleshooting ISO from a PVE template
.\" Copyright (c) 2024-2026 Ciro Iriarte
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH PVE\-CREATE\-TSHOOT\-IMAGE 8 "2026-03-28" "1.3.0" "Proxmox VE Tools"
.SH NAME
pve\-create\-tshoot\-image \- build a ReaR troubleshooting / restore ISO from a
Proxmox VE cloud\-init template
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B pve\-create\-tshoot\-image
.B \-t
.I VMID
.B \-c
.I CSV
.RB [ OPTIONS ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B pve\-create\-tshoot\-image
clones a PVE cloud\-init template into a temporary VM, installs
.BR rear (8)
and network diagnostic tools, then builds an ISO that can be booted on
physical or virtual hosts for troubleshooting and bare\-metal recovery.
.PP
On boot the ISO will:
.IP 1. 4
Read the system serial number (DMI) and look it up in the embedded CSV
to set the hostname and management IP.
.IP 2. 4
Bring up every physical NIC and start
.BR lldpd (8)
for neighbour discovery.
.IP 3. 4
Optionally configure a bonded VLAN management interface with per\-host IP.
.IP 4. 4
Present
.BR tcpdump (8),
.BR nic\-xray ,
and
.BR lldpcli (8)
for network diagnostics.
.IP 5. 4
Offer
.B rear recover
to deploy the base OS to local disks.
.SS Modes of operation
.TP
.B Local
Run directly on a PVE node (as root).
The ISO is written to the local filesystem.
Requires PVE tools, libguestfs, and python3.
.TP
.B Remote
Run from a jump host with
.BR \-S " " \fIuser@host\fR .
The script copies itself and the CSV to the PVE node via
.BR scp (1),
builds the ISO there, then downloads it back.
Only
.BR ssh (1)
and
.BR scp (1)
are needed locally.
.SS Supported distributions
.TS
tab(|);
lb lb lb lb
l l l l.
Family|Package manager|Network manager|Extras
_
Rocky Linux 9|dnf + EPEL|NetworkManager|nic-xray from OBS
Ubuntu LTS 22.04|apt|netplan/networkd|nic-xray from OBS
Ubuntu LTS 24.04|apt|netplan/networkd|nic-xray from OBS
openSUSE Leap 15.x|zypper|wicked|nic-xray from OBS
.TE
.PP
.B Note:
openSUSE Leap 16.x builds successfully but the ReaR rescue system
fails to boot due to udev incompatibility with the 6.12 kernel.
It is not supported for restore until ReaR ships a compatible version.
.SS Build workflow
.IP 1. 4
Clone the specified template to a temporary VM (full clone).
.IP 2. 4
Detect the distribution from the disk image
.RI ( /etc/os\-release ).
.IP 3. 4
Resize the disk (+10\ GB for packages and ReaR artifacts), inject
configuration files via
.BR virt\-customize (1),
and wipe host identity
.RI ( machine\-id ,
SSH host keys,
.IR random\-seed ).
.IP 4. 4
Boot the VM (cloud\-init grows the filesystem) and install packages via
the QEMU guest agent.
.IP 5. 4
Run
.B rear mkbackup
(or
.B rear mkrescue
with
.BR \-\-rescue\-only )
via the guest agent.
.IP 6. 4
Stop the VM, extract the ISO via
.BR virt\-copy\-out (1),
and destroy the temporary VM.
.PP
All VM interaction uses the QEMU guest agent (virtio serial channel).
No network connectivity is required between the PVE host and the build VM.
.SH OPTIONS
.SS Required
.TP
.BR \-t ", " \-\-template " " \fIVMID\fR
PVE template VM\ ID to use as the base image.
.TP
.BR \-c ", " \-\-csv " " \fIFILE\fR
Host inventory CSV file.
See
.B CSV FORMAT
below.
.SS Target\-host network
These parameters define the management network applied on physical hosts
after restore.
Per\-host IP and bond members come from the CSV.
.TP
.BI \-\-bond\-mode " MODE"
Bonding mode.
Default:
.BR 802.3ad .
.TP
.BI \-\-vlan\-id " ID"
Management VLAN ID.
Default: no VLAN.
.TP
.BI \-\-netmask " MASK"
Network mask (e.g.
.BR /24 " or " 255.255.255.0 ).
Required when
.B \-\-gateway
or
.B \-\-dns
is specified.
.TP
.BI \-\-gateway " GW"
Default gateway.
Required when
.B \-\-netmask
or
.B \-\-dns
is specified.
.TP
.BI \-\-dns " SERVERS"
Comma\-separated list of DNS servers.
Required when
.B \-\-netmask
or
.B \-\-gateway
is specified.
.TP
.BI \-\-proxy " URL"
HTTP/HTTPS proxy for restored hosts.
.SS Target\-host identity
These parameters configure user credentials on the restored system.
A systemd oneshot service applies them on first boot using the DMI serial
and CSV inventory.
.TP
.BI \-\-target\-user " USER"
User account to create (or configure if it already exists).
The user is given passwordless sudo access.
.TP
.BI \-\-target\-password " PW"
Password for the target user.
Hashed (SHA\-512) before embedding in the ISO.
.TP
.BI \-\-target\-ssh\-key " KEY"
Path to an SSH public key file, or the literal key string.
Installed into
.IR ~USER/.ssh/authorized_keys .
.SS Build\-VM network
These parameters control networking for the temporary build VM only.
.TP
.BI \-\-vm\-bridge " BRIDGE"
PVE bridge for the build VM NIC.
Default:
.BR vmbr0 .
.TP
.BI \-\-vm\-vlan " ID"
VLAN tag on the build VM NIC.
.TP
.BI \-\-vm\-ip " IP/MASK"
Build VM IP address.
Default:
.BR dhcp .
.TP
.BI \-\-vm\-gateway " GW"
Build VM gateway.
Required if
.B \-\-vm\-ip
is a static address.
.TP
.BI \-\-vm\-dns " DNS"
Build VM DNS server.
.TP
.BI \-\-vm\-proxy " URL"
HTTP/HTTPS proxy for the build VM.
.SS General
.TP
.BR \-s ", " \-\-storage " " \fISTORE\fR
PVE storage for the temporary VM disk.
Default:
.BR local\-lvm .
.TP
.BR \-o ", " \-\-output " " \fIDIR\fR
Output directory for the ISO file.
Default: current working directory.
.TP
.BR \-S ", " \-\-server " " \fIUSER@HOST\fR
Enable remote mode.
The argument specifies the PVE node to connect to via SSH.
.TP
.B \-\-rescue\-only
Build a rescue\-only ISO (no backup; smaller).
Uses
.B rear mkrescue
instead of
.BR "rear mkbackup" .
.TP
.BI \-\-rear\-timeout " SEC"
Timeout in seconds for the ReaR build step.
Default:
.BR 1800 .
.TP
.B \-\-dry\-run
Show what would be done without making any changes.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show the built\-in help message and exit.
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-version
Show the version number and exit.
.SH CSV FORMAT
The host inventory file is a comma\-separated file with four columns:
.PP
.RS
.nf
# serial,hostname,bond_members,ip
SVR001,web\-server\-01,eth0:eth1,10.0.0.11
SVR002,db\-server\-01,eno1:eno2,10.0.0.12
SVR003,app\-server\-01,ens1f0:ens1f1,10.0.0.13
.fi
.RE
.PP
.TP
.B serial
DMI system serial number (matched at boot).
.TP
.B hostname
Hostname to assign.
.TP
.B bond_members
Colon\-separated list of NIC names to bond (e.g.
.IR eth0:eth1 ).
The colon separator allows different hardware across servers.
.TP
.B ip
Management IP address.
.PP
Lines beginning with
.B #
are treated as comments.
.SH EXAMPLES
Local mode, ISO saved to the current directory:
.PP
.RS
.nf
pve\-create\-tshoot\-image \-t 9000 \-c hosts.csv
.fi
.RE
.PP
Local mode with a specific output directory:
.PP
.RS
.nf
pve\-create\-tshoot\-image \-t 9000 \-c hosts.csv \-o /var/tmp/iso/
.fi
.RE
.PP
Remote mode from a jump host:
.PP
.RS
.nf
pve\-create\-tshoot\-image \-t 9000 \-c hosts.csv \e
    \-S root@pve1.example.com
.fi
.RE
.PP
With VLAN management network:
.PP
.RS
.nf
pve\-create\-tshoot\-image \-t 9000 \-c hosts.csv \e
    \-\-vlan\-id 100 \-\-netmask /24 \e
    \-\-gateway 10.0.0.1 \-\-dns 8.8.8.8
.fi
.RE
.PP
Build VM on a specific VLAN with HTTP proxy:
.PP
.RS
.nf
pve\-create\-tshoot\-image \-t 9000 \-c hosts.csv \e
    \-\-vm\-vlan 302 \-\-vm\-proxy http://proxy:3128
.fi
.RE
.PP
Rescue\-only (smaller ISO, no backup):
.PP
.RS
.nf
pve\-create\-tshoot\-image \-t 9000 \-c hosts.csv \-\-rescue\-only
.fi
.RE
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /var/tmp/rear\-tshoot\-*/
Temporary working directory created during the build.
Cleaned up automatically on success.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
Failure (missing dependencies, build error, etc.).
.SH DEPENDENCIES
.SS Local mode
.BR qm (1),
.BR pvesm (1),
.BR pvesh (1),
.BR virt\-customize (1),
.BR virt\-cat (1),
.BR virt\-copy\-out (1),
.BR python3 (1).
.SS Remote mode
.BR ssh (1),
.BR scp (1).
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR rear (8),
.BR lldpd (8),
.BR tcpdump (8),
.BR qm (1),
.BR virt\-customize (1),
.BR pve\-import\-cloud\-images (8),
.BR pve\-vmnic\-fix (8)
.SH AUTHORS
Ciro Iriarte
.RI < ciro.iriarte+software@gmail.com >
.SH LICENSE
MIT
